welcome to topcast and to part two of my
little series knowledge and ignorance
based around the paper or other lectures
he calls it on the sources of knowledge
and of ignorance by Carl popper and I
know I said this last week but it's
worth saying again
the quality of writing in Karl Popper's
work broadly speaking is A Cut Above
what you encounter with just about any
other philosopher I want to say every
other philosopher I've read a fair bit
of philosophy I read a lot of rubbish
philosophy people recommend stuff to me
I recommend books to me and some of
those books I've commented on many of
them of late haven't been that great not
only in terms of substance but in terms
of style once you've read something like
the beginning of infinity or the fabric
of reality you do tend to see other
books in a pretty unfavorable light but
popper holds up especially in terms of
philosophy like when you read philosophy
generally it's rather dry and as I say
and as I've said before even modern
philosophers they tend to have this
ponchant one might say for
philosophizing in the abstract for
concocting Thought experiments thinking
about things that have haven't actually
ever happened in real life the so-called
trolley problems you know what if you
raised a baby in a room where there was
no stimuli except White Walls this kind
of thing and then they try and draw
conclusions from the experiments they've
just made up inside of their head this
is a problem and this creates a Poverty
of the substance now I should just
mention of course that someone like
Einstein actually did think up thought
experiments but there's a crucial
difference a crucial difference
his conclusions could be tested against
physical reality and this is completely
unlike so many of these trolley problem
type things
now the reason I mention that is because
popper doesn't do this Papa just goes
straight to the issues straight to
what's happening in real life he'll talk
about historic ideas he'll talk about
the science he'll talk about what some
other philosopher said and then compare
it to what's really going on in the
world so I'm up to part five and part
five conveniently contains a
recapitulation of the previous four
parts so we don't have to go over them
because popper basically summarizes what
he's just said so let's dive straight in
and I'll pause along the way and he says
quote in examining the optimistic
epistemology inherent in certain ideas
of liberalism I found a cluster of
doctrines which although often accepted
implicitly have not to my knowledge been
explicitly discussed or even noticed by
philosophers or historians end quote so
this is his introduction now he's
mentioned there optimistic epistemology
and what he's about to explain is what
he has already explained in the previous
four parts about this so-called
optimistic epistemology and for my
listeners if this is the first time
you're coming to this we're not talking
about optimism in the style of David
Deutsch we're not talking about optimism
of the software all Evils are due to
lack of knowledge that problems are
soluble that kind of thing this is
different this is an optimistic
epistemology where the optimism that's
talked about is not entirely a virtue
it's an Escape from a certain kind of
authoritarian epistemology but it brings
with it certain liabilities and he's
about to explain what those are so he's
just said he's going to talk about this
cluster of doctrines which haven't been
noticed before he says quote the most
fundamental of them is one which I have
already mentioned the doctrine that
truth is Manifest the strangest of them
is the conspiracy theory of ignorance
which is a curious outgrowth from the
doctrine of manifest truth end quote so
sorry for the stopping and starting but
this is this Bears sort of repeating and
emphasizing remember that the doctrine
of manifest truth is this idea that you
can see the truth in some way whether by
empirical means you just get it via your
census or whether by the inerrant
ability of your rational reasoning
capacity because you that can't ER for
whatever reason whether it's religious
or you've got some other argument as to
why your reason shouldn't ER whatever
the case this is the doctrine of
manifest truth that truth just manifests
itself and you can recognize it out
there in the world now that leads to a
problem and the problem is why people
are making mistakes why is there
ignorance in the world why don't people
agree all of this stuff well there must
be some conspiracy on this account
someone or someone's some group some
nefarious actors in the world the evil
people are keeping you from the truth
they're conspiring to keep you ignorant
that's the only possible way that you
could be deceived because your senses
aren't going to deceive you and your
reason won't Lead You astray well okay
so this is what popper is explaining and
he goes on to say quote by the doctrine
that truth is Manifest I mean you will
recall the optimistic view that truth if
put before us naked is always
recognizable as truth thus truth if it
does not reveal itself has only to be
unveiled or discovered once this is done
there is no need for further argument we
have been given eyes to see the truth
and the natural light of reason to see
it by end quote that's great that's
great don't just think that this is the
era of the ancient and classic
philosophers even today people tend to
think that a via our senses we just get
knowledge of the world and the light of
Reason enables us to see what the truth
is seeing is believing this kind of
thing so no interpretation is needed
interpretation happens later not before
the senses come into providing your
information it's just you get raw
information raw data and it's
uncontroversial we inherit this with
with phrases like evidence-based
whatever it happens to be once you've
got the evidence on your side it's
incontrovertible there's no need for
debate there's no need for interpreting
the evidence there's no need to worry
about how the evidence was collected any
of that stuff it just is what it is on
this view on this view you just need to
apply your reason the rational people
can do that the educator the Learned
amongst us the intellectuals and
academics they can inherently interpret
the evidence for us that's how we
inherit it today and there are modern
thinkers who explain pretty much of this
idea we'll come back to that Papa goes
on to say this Doctrine is at the heart
of the teaching of both Descartes and
bacon Descartes based his optimistic
epistemology on the important theory of
the veracetus day what we clearly and
distinctly see to be true must indeed be
true for otherwise God would be
deceiving us thus the truthfulness of
God must make truth manifest end quote
as I say you do an undergraduate a
degree or some subjects in philosophy
you will encounter Descartes he's one of
the big thinkers and indeed I find him a
genius of a kind but there are errors
that he makes and there are these
clangers where you think well that's
just a weak argument and one of them is
that when you have a clear and distinct
idea that therefore it must be true and
why must it be true well all he could
come back on is well God exists and God
is going to guarantee that what you
clearly and distinctly think of as true
must in fact be true now consider his
whole idea of method of doubt that you
doubt everything around you because you
could always be deceived by the evil
demon or you could be dreaming or any of
a number of other ways in which in
modern times we think about ways in
which we might not be encountering
reality as it is we might be in a
simulation whatever your thought
experiment happens to be what Descartes
concluded is that you can do all the
doubting that you like but something has
to be doing the doubting and that's
something is you therefore you exist and
that cannot be doubted okay because
doubt exists something like that so he
said that when you think you are I think
I am is a necessary truth sometimes
people have interpreted this over the
years I think uh he might perhaps he
said it in one of his other writings but
it's been reinterpreted as I think
therefore I am which sounds like an
argument I think therefore I am but it
but they can't ever intend it to be an
argument of that sort he intended it to
be a necessary truth that you could
perceive no argument required are you
just clearly and distinctly perceive it
so as far as I know someone listener
might want to correct me I don't think
he ever actually said I think therefore
I am I know in the meditations he said I
think I am and sometimes that I think
therefore I am is is shortened to be
called the kojita kojito okay which is
Latin I think therefore I am but once
again I don't know that he ever actually
wrote that I think it was attributed to
him could be wrong whatever the case
this is supposed to be the one thing
that you can't doubt that you exist one
of the most prominent intellectual
podcasters of her age Sam Harris thinks
this he says this whenever the topic
comes up essentially that there's one
thing that you can't doubt and that's
your own existence but as I've argued
before I don't think that this is the
case because you can doubt a whole bunch
of things if you say I think I am as a
necessary truth or I think therefore I
am or you know doubt exists whatever
this is you've got a string of
characters there I think therefore I am
so are you saying the string of
characters in English is labeling as
necessarily true the concept behind that
you if you say I think therefore I am
you're you're assuming that I mean
something think means something and
means something all of these words
necessarily you must be inerrant about
you must be absolutely certain that
these things label necessary truths of
some sort as well you suddenly have a
whole bunch of dominoes that begin to
fall down Each of which is a necessary
truth in order for you to build up this
I think therefore I am necessary truth
so you're suddenly inherent about a
whole bunch of things you you can't
possibly be wrong but you can be
misconceived you can just be mistaken
about what you think and by the way it's
pointless anyway like who cares really
why do you need this basis well we know
what I need the spaces because they
think of knowledge as Justified true
belief and without a foundation on which
they can build the edifice of their
knowledge then they don't feel justified
in believing any of the rest of it but
you shouldn't be believing any of it
anyway you should just regard it as the
best knowledge you have for solving your
problems at any given time the best set
of explanations that you have belief is
Superfluous to the project you can have
your beliefs if you like but what's the
point in really truly believing this
stuff you can move throughout the world
and make progress and make your life
better and all of that stuff without
believing anything just think Newton's
theory of gravity okay it's strictly
false no one should believe it so you're
not justified in thinking it true
because it's not true it's false
demonstrably so yet it counts as
knowledge it's something that people
know it can solve their problems it
persists over time because it's so
useful it's the thing that once
instantiated tends to cause itself to
remain so why because people find it
useful for solving problems and that's
what knowledge is the information that
is useful the information that persists
the information that is resilient in
Chiara my letters terminology but of
course Descartes like others wants the
knowledge to be certain in some way
shape or form to be true and for us to
know it as being true and he would say
that well the reason why I think
therefore I am you can understand it
clearly and distinctly as true it's
because there's a guarantor there namely
God who is all good and of course he had
his ontological argument for God amongst
others it's the same as Saint anselms
this idea that if you can imagine a
being more perfect than every other
being which you can do just try it can
you imagine the possibility of a being
more perfect than every other being you
can can't you I mean I can right now
well if you can imagine a being more
perfect than every other being then the
very concept of perfection the very
concept of perfection entails existence
why because if this being that you can
imagine the most perfect of all more
perfect than anything else didn't exist
then it would have an imperfection it
wouldn't be as perfect as things that
actually do exist like regular human
beings walking around regular human
beings walking around are imperfect in
some way but you can imagine something
more perfect than that and so therefore
that being must exist right because
otherwise it would lack the thing namely
existence that we have but you're
already imagining something better than
us so this is the ontological argument
this is Descartes version of the
ontological argument which has a whole
lot of problems okay here's here's a
simple here's a simple counterclaim to
that problem you can imagine the most
perfect cup of coffee as well
does that entail that the most perfect
cup of coffee exists out there in some
abstract realm presumably not and repeat
for every other object okay it doesn't
just have to be being
I should just put a caveat here God may
or may not exist but this is not an
argument that one should endorse for
organizing their life around a
particular religion based on this
argument but you know the classic
philosophers they did this Descartes did
this and he needed he needed an argument
he needed a logical proof for God so
that he could have the rest of his
philosophy be a deductive system of a
kind they love this kind of thing
they're all aping what was going on with
the ancient Greeks and with Euclid they
thought well mathematics is perfect so
we need our philosophy to resemble that
Spinosa did something similar leibenitz
was a mathematician half of the time and
a philosopher half the time and say his
philosophy was always very mathematical
in style as well it's very deductive
less less explanatory more here are the
axioms that no one can doubt and here
are the conclusions that necessarily
follow even if you find them astonishing
perhaps okay let's go back to popper so
he's just talked about how they car had
an optimistic epistemology based upon
this thing called the veracetus Dai and
days of course God and God is the thing
that guarantees that we understand truth
when we see it it goes on to say quote
in bacon we have a similar Doctrine it
might be described as the doctrine of
the veracetus nature the truthfulness of
nature nature is an open book He who
reads it with a pure mind cannot misread
it only if his mind is poisoned by
Prejudice can he fall into error this
last remark shows that the doctrine the
truth is Manifest creates the need to
explain falsehood knowledge the
possession of Truth need not to be
explained but how can we ever fall into
error if truth is Manifest end quote
that is brilliant that's really really
insightful that popper is pointing this
out one of the first as far as I'm aware
to point out this kind of thing because
it was just uncontroversial to the
Ancients into the classics the classic
philosophers of the 17th and 18th
century of the Renaissance of the
Enlightenment who are saying well
knowledge is just is truth in a sense
we're just learning the truth when we do
mathematics when we do science we do
philosophy we're just learning the truth
and it's it's no huge mystery because
hey we're just using our senses or we're
using our reason and both of these
things are inerrant in some way okay
uncontroversial but then you've got this
problem of you know how do you explain
people disagreeing in people in
ignorance and people falling into error
and all this sort of stuff well so Papa
goes on how can we just said but how can
we ever fall into error of Truth as
Manifest he goes on quote the answer is
through our own sinful refusal to see
the Manifest truth or because our minds
Harbor prejudices inculcated by
education and tradition or other evil
influences which have perverted our
originally pure and innocent Minds
ignorance maybe the work of powers
conspiring to keep us in ignorance to
poison our minds by filling them with
falsehood and to Blind our eyes so they
cannot see the Manifest truth such
prejudices and such Powers then are
sources of ignorance end quote well
there we go so why are people ignorant
well because we've got prejudices
inculcated by educational tradition or
our sinful refusal to see the Manifest
truth so we've got this religious notion
that well we're just evil and we're just
refusing to acknowledge the truth now
you get this kind of in Iron round you
get this in her in objectivist
philosophy the notion of evasion you're
evading reality you're evading truth now
there might be some truth in that but it
isn't a good explanation of why variety
is that people are ignorant much less
why people can actually gain knowledge
via imperfect senses and so forth and
the religious people say well you're
being sinful in some way there's one
thing that popper leaves out there I
would say so he's mentioned well we've
got these prejudices inculcated by
education and tradition and we inherit
this today you know you read stuff by
let's say modern rationalists like
Stephen Pinker and he will say that he
will say well we've got biases don't we
we've all got these psychological biases
that maybe tradition has given us maybe
our education has given us or what's
Papa left out ah the genetics the
genetic biases that we're born with and
we probably can't do anything about
because it's there baked into our DNA in
some way so we're born sinful because of
our evil DNA is causing us to be violent
or a racist or name your Prejudice it's
there in the DNA in some way shape or
form we never told where
never told exactly where on the genome
these genes for these biases are but
they're there they're there that's the
evolutionary psychology and you know
that's that's a rock solid foundation
after all look at all the physical
features that you have they're there in
the genome somewhere and the genome is
the thing that codes for your brain and
well the brain is the mind and so
therefore of course you know anything
that goes wrong in the DNA and the
coding for the mind is going to lead to
Prejudice and imperfection and an
incapacity of course to understand
reality you know ultimately speaking
we're all stuck in Middle world because
our mind has evolved only to understand
human sized and human speed things
this is all part of the bias that we
inherit so as papa says there ignorance
may be the work of powers conspiring to
keep us in ignorance to poison our minds
by filling them with falsehood and and
what I would say there and could add to
that one of that source of ignorance is
our genetics our genetics are just
filling up our minds there's genes
filling up our minds with prejudices and
falsehoods blinding us so we cannot see
the Manifest truth
so that's the modern incantation so we
think we escape you know the the
so-called silliness of the Ancients oh
those ignorant ancients who didn't
understand it that we're not we're not
sinful there's no such thing as Sin and
evil and that kind of thing we're smart
modern people now scientifically minded
we don't believe in being born with sin
no no no we've escaped from that
we just believe that the genes are the
things that cause us ignorance and we're
stuck being evil people because the DNA
confers upon us all evil tendencies
much of a difference I think
you're replacing our fallen Natures due
to some religious or spiritual failing
with well our fallen nature is due to
some genetic failing
okay let's keep going popper goes on to
say quote the conspiracy theory of
ignorance is fairly well known in its
marxian form as the conspiracy of a
capitalist press that perverts and
suppresses truth and fills the workers
Minds with false ideologies prominent
among these of course are the doctrines
of religion it is surprising to find how
unoriginal this Marxist theory is end
quote so papa says there that it's
surprising it's surprising to find how
unoriginal this Marxist ideas now of
course Papa did have does have great
respect for Marx as a thinker he just
doesn't think Marxism is a scientific
theory as Marx insisted it was and his
followers insisted that it was many
people Grant you know marks as being a
great thinking he spends much of his
time praising The Virtuous capitalism he
just doesn't think that capitalism
ultimately ultimately can save everyone
from poverty okay so he he makes some
missteps and so then he falls into well
therefore you know we need social
control and all this sort of stuff but I
don't know how surprising it is like
Marxism is a religion to some extent
without you know the god bits he takes
out the God but he keeps the rest of
everything else well that's not just the
god bits perhaps the good bits would be
nearer the mark religion without the
good bits you know he keeps all the
collectivism okay he he turns that into
a political ideology so you've got the
collectivism of religion becoming the
collectivism of a political ideology and
of course you have Collective punishment
yeah sacrifice and altruism for some
greater good is all there so never mind
the individual okay the individual
should be suppressed in some way
subservient to the the group and to the
greater good and all this sort of stuff
so this is the way in which Marxism and
religion are very closely aligned in
certain ways okay indifferent in other
ways but you know many people have
observed many people have observed and
there's one thing the objectivists
actually get right that that Marxist
theory it it really is kind of Christian
in a sense there's a lot of the morality
is Christian the way in which social
organization Works seems like it's
Christian you know it talks about
egalitarianism but ultimately you know
you kind of need leaders there to
organize stuff and when they actually
get in power and they have power things
go wrong this sort of thing okay let's
keep going let's go on with popper so
he's just said it is surprising to find
how unoriginal this Marxist theory is
the wicked and fraudulent priest who
keeps the people in ignorance was a
stock figure of the 18th century and I'm
afraid one of The Inspirations of
liberalism it can be traced back to the
Protestant belief in the conspiracy of
the Roman Church and also to the beliefs
of those dissenters who held similar
views about the established church
elsewhere I have traced the pre-history
of this belief back to Plato's Uncle
kritius end quote let's go to what he
said about Plato's uncle kritius in the
open society and its enemies because
well that book itself is just brilliant
you know certainly well worth reading
but it's just so big you know it's a
mountain to climb I don't know if on if
on top cast I could ever quite um do it
justice but certainly here's an
opportunity to just read a a few parts
of the open society and its enemies and
it's in chapter eight popper is
referring to himself and chapter 8 is
called the philosopher king and there's
some absolute gems here and I just want
to read the very beginning of Chapter
eight and he begins with a quote from
plater and Plato says quote and the
state will erect monuments to
commemorate them and sacrifices will be
offered to them as demigods as men who
are blessed by grace and Godlike in
quote from Plato let's pick it up from
where Papa rights in the open Society
quote the contrast between the platonic
and the socratic Creed is even greater
than I have shown so far Plato I have
said followed Socrates in his definition
of the philosopher whom do you call true
philosophers those who love truth we
read in the Republic but he himself is
not quite truthful when he makes this
statement he does not really believe it
for he bluntly declares in other places
that it is one of the royal privileges
of The Sovereign to make full use of
lies and deceit quote from Plato it is
the business of the rulers of the city
if it is anybody's to tell lies
deceiving both its enemies and its own
citizens for the benefit of the city and
no one else must touch this privilege
end quote Now isn't that disgusting
isn't that awful and don't you feel as
if at some times that politicians today
and politicians historically have made
full use of something like that they
think they're doing the right thing by
lying to the citizenry they think it's
for the benefit of the city the benefit
of the citizens in order to lie how many
of them have read Plato I know some have
but certainly they follow in this idea
that you do get this sense at times for
many of them that they think they're the
philosopher Kings they have the Divine
Right In some respect okay so they
wouldn't put it in those words of course
but there are many people who seem to
have matured with the idea that they
were born to rule in some way they're
the right person to be in charge they
can set things right they can think
better than others they can think for
others they'll make the place better
they understand the truth the rest of us
plebeians we don't okay we need to do
what they say because they will put
Society on the right guide rails in
order to make everything better and if
you listen if you listen to some Modern
philosophers
on this point you know during the brexit
debate we saw this the the collapse of
certain parts of the intellectual
Community who seem to be offering
arguments basically like this that we
need the Intelligentsia we need experts
we need to be ruled by people who
understand science perhaps philosophy
but they need to understand they need to
be well educated which is a terrifying
thing what they're arguing for is
philosopher Kings okay so they might get
elected there might be elections to get
them in place but the point is what they
really want up there is not the citizen
they want the elite the elite are part
of the citizenry but it would be a
strange World in which to live where you
needed to have some sort of examination
in order to become a leader but this is
actually what people are arguing some
people some very intelligent you know
popularizers of Science and philosophy
and that kind of thing today argue we
should have an examination before you're
allowed to vote before we let the vote
much less run for office okay but this
is all this is is all in the style of
Plato there are the Learned people and
the Learned people are the ones who buy
rights should be ruling over the rest of
us because they have the best ideas they
are able to avoid the errors that the
uneducated plebeians will make okay it
sounds reasonable doesn't it it sounds
reasonable but this is the truth is
Manifest tyranny and it's
anti-fallibleist much less
anti-democratic of course the whole idea
that for having leaders of any kind is
well it's the best system that we've got
because we can't think of anything
better you need something to organize
things and so why not have this system
where well at least you can remove them
without violence once they've done the
wrong thing okay because we have to
expect error we have to expect things to
go wrong in society and when someone has
caused them to go wrong or a policy has
caused things to go wrong to restrict
progress in some way to cause violent
conflict well let's get rid of that
politician and or policy that's what
democracy is so we can vote people out
because the other systems the anarchic
systems the tyrannical systems the
authoritarian systems they were they've
been tried as Winston Churchill says
democracy is bad but it's better than
all of those others that have been tried
from time to time like those ones but
let me go down to where popper actually
mentions Plato's Uncle kritius who's the
guy he credits with this notion that the
the reason why we're ignorant is because
we're being kept in Ignorance by some
conspiracy so I'm going to read a not a
super lengthy section but you know
something substantial here it's section
two of Chapter eight and and papa says
quote Plato introduces his myth of blood
and soil with the blunt admission that
it is a fraud well then it says the
Socrates of the Republic could we
perhaps fabricate one of those very
handy Liars which indeed we mentioned
just recently with the help of one
single lordly lie we may if we are lucky
persuade even the rulers themselves but
at any rate the rest of the city end
quote from Socrates via Plato as
appearing in Poplar what is this myth of
blood inside okay so the myth of blood
and soil has been used historically
um by many different leaders notably by
the Nazis of course to say that there is
some inherent tie between where you're
born and the soil so you have some
special connection to where you're born
by virtue of the fact that you were born
there and your ancestors in particular
were born there this introduces the idea
of racial disparity between people you
belong to where you trace your heritage
a Despicable idea this notion that I as
a Caucasian person who lives in
Australia have some special claim on
let's say where my ancestors were in
England that I should be able to go over
to England and to lay claim to the land
on this argument but it's a bizarre and
strange and of course racist argument
but sadly it's it's still used even
today but notably it was of course used
by Hitler and saying the Germans have a
special right to Germany and so
therefore these immigrants they don't
they don't belong here this is the myth
of blood and soil and and so Plato is
arguing well you know this is one of
these lies that maybe you need maybe you
need this in a kingdom in order to
justify why you're keeping out other
people you know and you you have you
have your citizens have special rights
in this particular City popper goes on
to say about this quote it is
interesting to note the use of the term
persuade
because he's just said that this lie
this lie that there's a special
connection between blood your race and
soil the place where you live
this lie can persuade the leaders
themselves and perhaps the rest of the
city popper says quote to persuade
somebody to believe a lie means more
precisely to mislead or to hoax him and
it would be more in tune with the Frank
cynicism of the passage to translate we
may if we are lucky hoax even the rulers
themselves but Plato uses the term
persuasion very frequently and its
occurrence here throws some light on
other passages it may be taken as a
warning that in similar passages he may
have propaganda lies in his mind more
especially where he Advocates that the
Statesman should rule by means of both
persuasion and force end quote and this
is why you know because I've read Pat
Plato it's extremely dry and you just
think well this is all clearly false you
know people take him very seriously
though and their Plato's Republic is
read and taken very seriously it's very
influential but it contains this sort of
brick you know this this notion that you
know you need the strong man ruling you
need the smart people ruling because he
didn't think the mob could rule he
thought democracy was about answering
the question of who should Rule and you
can't have the citizens rule you can't
just have the mob Rule and of course you
can't have the model you can't just have
the the majority rule over to take away
the rights of the minority but this is
the whole point of democracy it's not
there to answer the question about who
should rule it's about being able to
remove whoever's ruling without force
and without violence this is the problem
that popper solved but Plato didn't get
that so Plato argues for a certain kind
of tyranny okay he argues for the
philosopher king but it's still a tyrant
ultimately and that person should rule
by force in some ways in some cases so
I'm skipping apart and then and popper
goes on to explain that part of the myth
this myth of blood and soil is the myth
of racialism he says quote quoting Plato
God has put gold into those who are
capable of ruling silver into the
auxiliaries and iron and copper into the
peasants and the other producing classes
end quote pop a comment on this these
metals are hereditary they are racial
characteristics in this passage in which
Plato hesitatingly first introduces his
racialism he allows for the possibility
that children may be born with an
admixture of another metal than those of
their parents and it must be admitted
here that he announces the following
rule if in one of the lower classes
quote children are born with an
admixture of gold and silver they shall
be appointed Guardians and auxiliaries
end quote Papa goes on but this
concession is rescinded in later
passages of the Republic especially in
the story of the fall of Man and the
number partially quoted in chapter five
above from this passage we may learn
that any admixture of one of the base
Metals must be excluded from the higher
classes the possibility of admixtures
and corresponding changes in status
therefore only means that nobly born but
degenerate children may be pushed down
and not that any of the base Born may be
lifted up end quote And So It Goes On so
our Plato's a racist
Plato is saying you're born or a
classist at least you're born into a
particular class you're born into the
ruling class and so you've got lots of
money and you deserve that money by the
mere fact that you've been born there
and if you're born into the elite the
silver well then you deserve to be there
and have all the rights and privileges
that you've been born with but if you're
a peasant you've just been born with
copper and iron well your lot is you're
the destined you're destined to just be
a laborer working for everyone else okay
you have you have no say in the
direction in which society takes but let
me let me let me jump to the point where
popper is crediting Plato's Uncle as
being the originator of this idea that
we should lighten the the populace we
can explain ignorance we can explain
ignorance among people because of some
great deception some great conspiracy on
the part of leaders or someone else
popular rights quote in fact Plato's
attitude towards religion as revealed by
his inspired lie is practically
identical with that of critius his
beloved Uncle the brilliant leader of
the 30 tyrants who established an
Inglorious blood regime in Athens after
the Peloponnesian War critius a poet was
the first to glorify propaganda lies
whose invention he described in forceful
verses eulogizing the wise and cunning
man who fabricated religion in order to
persuade the people I.E to threaten them
into submission and he quotes kritius
who wrote then came it seems that wise
and cunning man the first inventor of
the fear of the Gods he framed a tale a
most alluring Doctrine concealing Truth
by veils of lying law he told of the
Abode of awful Gods up in revolving
vaults went thunder roars and
Lightning's fearful flashes blind the
eye he thus encircled Men by bonds of
fear surrounding them by gods and
pharaohbodes he Charmed them by his
spells and daunted them and lawlessness
turned into Law and Order and quote
incredius's view religion is nothing but
the lordly LIE of a great and clever
Statesman Plato's views are strikingly
similar both in the introduction of the
myth and the Republic where he bluntly
admits that the myth is a lie and in the
laws where he says that the installation
of Rights and of gods is a matter for a
great thinker but is this the whole
truth about Plato's religious attitude
was he nothing but an opportunist in
this field and was the very different
Spirit of his earlier Works merely
Socratic there is of course no way of
deciding this question with certainty
though I feel intuitively that there may
sometimes be a more genuine religious
feeling expressed even in the later
works end quote so this is the idea this
is this is the the genus I suppose of
ideas that ignorance comes to us via
some great conspiracy and perhaps some
of the greatest ignorance that we have
including ignorance of superstitious
type stuff you know people are blinded
by believing in silly religious ideas
let's say only because only because some
higher power Earthly higher power and
authority the priest or the leader
something like that is actively
conspiring to deceive the rest of the
people who if only they weren't being
deceived would see the truth plainly
enough okay because the truth is
Manifest so the only way to keep that
truth hidden is by lying to people about
what in fact they're seeing okay so
leaving behind the open society and
going back again to to what I'm
originally what I was originally reading
from on the sources of knowledge and of
ignorance Pauper says after having just
talked about that passage that I have
read there quote this curious belief in
a conspiracy is the almost inevitable
consequence of the optimistic belief
that truth and therefore goodness must
Prevail if only truth is given a fair
chance let her and falsehood grapple
whoever knew truth put to the worst in a
free open encounter and that's from the
Ariel pagatika which is Milton's John
Milton's work and papa says of this so
when Milton's truth was put to the worst
the necessary inference was at the
encounter had not been free and open if
the Manifest truth does not Prevail it
must have been maliciously suppressed
end quote so Milton wrote this work this
Ariel pagetika he was arguing against
censorship he was arguing against
censorship so one of the very earliest
writers on liberal ideas and so this is
all the way back in 1644 so so really
the beginnings of these ideas that you
know the populace is entitled to know
stuff we don't need this Priestly or
kingly aristocratic class telling us
what the truth is where people can come
to to learn stuff themselves then it
doesn't need to be a filter between
reality and the people namely this
priesthood or whatever you want to call
it this this utter layer of people the
educated class don't need to be between
us and learning stuff and so Milton
wrote about this but Milton rather
naively he sort of thought well if you
just have the truth out there and it's
allowed to fight with falsehood then the
truth naturally will out okay eventually
the truth must come out on top this can
generally be the case it can generally
be the case but it doesn't have to
necessarily be the case is the point
necessarily be the case of the point and
by the way you know there's a lot more
ways to be wrong than to be right and so
we should expect of course following
proper but there is misconception in
every single thing we know every single
thing we know contains also
misconceptions ultimately it's not the
truth anyway so the truth won't will out
at all it won't will out at all so as
good as Milton was you know all of these
ideas you know that we talk about from
the classics they they contain some seed
of truth that allows you know new ideas
to flourish but you never get to the
final truth they just contain something
worth building upon and worth taking
further without any of them being a
solid perfect Foundation because all of
them contain some kind of misconception
it's more like a filtering process okay
discarding the errors and and retaining
what might be useful and true you don't
know exactly you can't you can't State
exactly what is true you just know that
this particular idea because it works
it's worth preserving but that's not to
say that it's finally true and so what
pop has just said there is that well
Milton had this idea that the truth will
win out and why because manifest truth
has to Prevail the only way it can't be
is if it's being maliciously suppressed
he says Papa goes on to say quote one
can see that an attitude of Tolerance
which is based upon an optimistic faith
in the victory of truth may be easily
shaken for it is liable to turn into a
conspiracy theory which would be hard to
reconcile with an attitude of Tolerance
end quote so what is he saying there so
he's saying that if you think that truth
will out and it doesn't then the only
thing that you can conclude is there a
cons there is a conspiracy there's an
active conspiracy by bad people keeping
the truth from us which is incompatible
with an attitude of Tolerance why well
because if you've got this conspiracy
actively hiding the truth from people
those people are bad so you can't
possibly tolerate them you can't
tolerate these people who know the truth
but are hiding it from you so this is a
problem for liberalism right on the one
hand it's a good idea to say hey look
everyone should be allowed to read all
the books okay we shouldn't have
censorship okay people should be allowed
to have copies of whatever book they
like people should write whatever they
like people should be allowed to have
access to newspapers and learn to read
and all this sort of stuff we shouldn't
have censorship ship especially on
government censorship so that's a good
thing and why why should we because well
the truth will out as Milton said the
truth will out so this is the reason why
we shouldn't have censorship of stuff
it's better to have a battle of ideas
and you know the and see who wins well
pop is saying yeah that's all very good
that's all very good so far in the sense
that yes you should have the Battle of
ideas he agrees with that liberal
attitude absolutely but what he's also
implying here what is concluding is that
but it's not necessarily the case that
the truth is going to win out okay
that's not a foregone conclusion because
there's infant ignorance in the world
but of course the people who think that
manifest that the truth must win out
must win out have to then explain why it
doesn't in some circumstances and so
what they say is because the truth is
Manifest and therefore must will out the
only explanation for when the truth
doesn't win is the great conspiracy the
great evil and if there is the great
conspiracy there's the great evil then
you want to take up arms again against
those people because they're actively
deceiving the world the citizens you
know your neighbors your family and so
they're keeping the the Manifest truth
from you this is not compatible with
tolerance okay and popular saying well
there's a better way ultimately he's
saying that there's a better way that
you can have this battle of ideas but
you have to recognize that everyone's
going to make errors you're going to
make errors people are going to make
errors in trying to interpret what the
best idea is and often come to the wrong
conclusion but it's still better to have
the Battle of ideas right it's still
better to have the Battle of IDs there
is no better system than to have the
free exchange of ideas not because you
are guaranteed of getting the truth but
because it's the only means of error
correction we might say in modern
parlance okay just read a little more
here I've barely gotten through one
section but this is good it's good stuff
as you can see he goes on to say quote
pop is saying I do not assert that there
was never a grain of Truth in this
conspiracy theory but in the main it was
a myth just as a theory of manifest
truth from which it grew was a myth for
the simple truth is that truth is often
hard to come by and once found it may be
easily lost again erroneous beliefs may
have an astonishing power to survive for
thousands of years in defiance of
experience and without the aid of any
conspiracy The History of Science and
especially of medicine could furnish us
with a number of good examples one
example is indeed the general conspiracy
theory itself I mean the erroneous view
that whenever something evil happens it
must be due to the evil will of an evil
power various forms of this view have
survived down to our own day thus the
optimistic epistemology of bacon and
Descartes cannot be true yet Perhaps the
strangest thing in the story is that
this false epistemology was the major
inspiration of an intellectual and moral
Revolution without parallel and history
end quote now pop is about to go on with
just what I think is a next to
breathtaking summary of despite the fact
that bacon and Descartes didn't get
things ultimately right that theirs
their as Enlightenment thinkers were an
escape from so much authoritarian
nonsense and led to this revolution of
Enlightenment thinking in the history of
ideas so I want to take time to really
read through this and unpack what
they're saying and it just want to try
and impress upon the listener the power
of a passage like this which I don't
find many parallels in the work of other
philosophers especially other modern
philosophers of the 20th century there's
nothing this inspiring until you get to
David Deutsch so pop is going to begin
this beautiful passage by talking about
the optimistic epistemology of bacon and
Descartes now what was that well the
optimistic epistemology of bacon was
that we could observe the facts of
reality okay observation was the thing
that allowed us to come to certain
knowledge of a Kind this is the
empiricist doctrine okay this is what we
inherit from the enlightenment British
thinkers in the form of bacon Descartes
the Continental thinker who thought that
clear and distinct ideas our reason was
able to give us truth in some way
Deliver us the truth the final truth
because our rational faculties would not
allow us to ER so what does Papa say
about these two great thinkers and what
did they lay the foundations of or the
beginnings of a particular movement a
revolution an Enlightenment style of
thinking let's read what papa says a a
passage as I say that I find
unparalleled amongst so many other
modern philosophers contemporaries of
Papa much less people that came later
until David Deutsche Papa wrote quote
thus the optimistic epistemology of
bacon and Descartes cannot be true yet
Perhaps the strangest thing in this
story is that this false epistemology
was the major inspiration of an
intellectual and moral Revolution
without parallel in history it
encouraged men to think for themselves
it gave them hope that through knowledge
they might free themselves and others
from servitude and misery it made modern
science possible it became the basis of
the fight against censorship and the
suppression of free thoughts it became
the basis of the non-conformist
conscience of individualism and of a new
sense of man's Dignity of a demand for
Universal education and of a new dream
of a free Society it made men feel
responsible for themselves and for
others and eager to improve not only
their own condition but also of their
fellow men it is a case of a bad idea
inspiring many good ones end quote again
as I say speaking of unparalleled that's
unparalleled that's beautiful this idea
that you don't need a certainly true
perfect Foundation of an idea in order
to spawn all of these other movements
for progress progress can happen because
you can take what is true within an idea
although you might not be able to
articulate it and use it in order to
solve problems elsewhere so these ideas
of bacon and Descartes yes we get from
baking the idea that observation that
our sense provide us with something it's
important to use our senses to use
observation in things like science to
decide between the theories we guess yes
so bacon was the first one to really
emphasize this notion of empiricism and
as papa says he's an empiricist of a
kind just not that kind he just thinks
that observations are important they're
also Theory later and Descartes the
great rationalists the Continental
rationalist who said reason is the way
in which we can get to the truth well
not quiet but reason is absolutely
indispensable to the project of creating
knowledge and together you take what is
good about these to blend them together
and you get this papyrian View and also
all of this other great stuff that he's
just mentioned there the basis of the
fight against censorship the sense of
individualism and man's dignity the
dream of a free Society so that comes
from bacon and Descartes who ultimately
their ideas ultimately were false but
they contained within them to see leads
for progress and for the rest of the
Enlightenment that followed and further
for the concept of objective knowledge
that popper has gifted to us and which
David Deutsch has now taken even further
I think that's a wonderful way to end
things for today I actually only got
through what One path this was part five
so I've got a feeling this particular
series is going to go on longer than I
thought but no matter and you know
that's what I've said before all the way
back to episode one one of the reasons
that I do talk cast is for my own
amusement and if other people happen to
find this at all interesting then that's
a it's a bonus
Well for now until next time bye
[Music]